# Lab Journal: Exercise 2

Authors: Frey Christian, Johann Kruemmel

##Exercise 1

The monetary shock increases the wealth in the daily budget constraint of each agent equally in nominal terms extending their cosumption set possibilites. Hence the agents demand for potatoes increases and therefore prices as well. In the same time, agents decrease their labour supply (man-hour volume), respectively increase their leisure time, so that wages (man-hour price) increase. Note that agents also store a fraction of their wealth or money reserve, so that these effects transfer to the next period and self accelerate up to a maximal peak. After some periods, the price effects flatten out and we remark around 30 days later, that both price levels (potatoes and man hours) turn almost back to their pre monetary shock level, being a bit higher giving rise to an inflation scenario. Remark that the magnitude of price effects for both goods (potatoes and man-hours) is similar over time, apart from the fact, that wages rise earlier in time. 

The increase of the money supply has two effects on the daily average utility : In the short run, the utility decreases relatively sharply, since money does not enter the utility function, and due to the down shift in potatoes production and the increased potatoe price, leading to a lower demand which is initially not completely offset by the raise in leisure time. In the mid term (after approximately 30 days), the average daily utiliy turns back to its pre level before the one time monetary shock. 


##Exercise 2

First, note that since both agent types take part in the simulated market, each agent's type choice of the money reserve fraction has an influence on the choice of the \emph{other} agent's money reserve fraction and the corresponding average (expected) final utility. Recall that TestConsumers have a deterministic life span, while the life span of GeneralConsumers is stochastic (uniformly distributed). Therefore, the right measure for TestConsumers is - as for the GeneralConsumers - the average expected (final) utility.

Second, we can interpret the maximization of the average final utility over all consumers and over the average of all outcomes (i.e. noting that the lifespan of GeneralConsumers is a random variable) as a social planner which weights each agent type and each individual agent with the same equal weight, seeking for the optimal final (average) utility in expectation. Since agents measure their welfare in terms of a utility function (which is in the current log case strictly concave), lower levels of potatoes and leisure time get overproportionally less utility than higher ones. This implies that a social planner, maximizing the expectation over all agents, implicitly takes agents with lower utility "stronger" into account than higher ones. In particular,  this will be relevant for TestConsumers in the \emph{InterestDistribution} scenario.

\emph{EqualDistribution} scenario

We remark that the average (expected) utitlities at the end of the time horizon are approximately the same for Test- and GeneralConsumere in the baseline (\emph{EqualDistribution}) scenario, fixing the money reserve to 20% for both consumer types. Switching to the proportional mode or equivalently, the dividend  (\emph{InterestDistribution} scenario), the average (expected) utility  of TestConsumers decreases stronger, while the average (expected) final utility of the General Consumer increases only slightly. 

Simulation results show that under the \emph{EqualDistribution} scenario, utilities differ only slightly between Test- and General Consumers under different specifications for each consumer type concerning the money reserve (even when setting money reserve to zero), showing that hoarding money has only a marginal effect under the Helicopter Money scenario since, obviously, the effect equalizing distribution effect of Helicopter Money is stronger than the individual effect of each agent storing money reserve.


\emph{InterestDistribution} scenario

Simulation results show that TestConsumers have an incentive to store around 90\% of their money fraction to reach an optimal average (expected) utility at the end of the time horizon, a result which is not very sensitive to the money fraction stored by GeneralConsumers. It is interesting to note, that for money reserves higher than 90% (in particular above 95%), the average (expected) final utility of TestConsumers decreases sharply with a strong magnitude (from the range [5, 6] units to 1 unit). 
On the other hand, GeneralConsumers reach their optimal average (expected) utility around 50% money reserve, approximately insensitive to the strategy chosen by LocalConsumers. It is worthy to note that the average expected utility of GeneralConsumers does not change much up to a money reserve of 85% given the TestConsumer chooses the same money reserve. For higher money reserve values, the average (expected) final utility of GeneralConsumers only decreases by one unit.

Hence, an approximate equilibrium, where each agent type has no incentive to deviate (in the sense to gain a higher expected (average) final utility by deviating), can be roughly fixed at the aobove mentioned levels (85% money reserve for each agent type). This is in strong contrast to the \emph{EqualDistribution} scenario, where each agents  expected (average) final utility is not very sensitive to changes in the money reserve fraction. Considering the TestConsumer types, the first reason for this increase in the "optimal" money reserve when switching to the \emph{InterestDistribution} scenario is that - as mentioned above - their life span is deterministic (hence exhibiting less randomness than the General Consumers) so that the differences in wealth between TestConsumers matter more than between GeneralConsumers for the the Social Planner maximizinig the average (expected) final utility of these types. The second and more important reason which holds for both consumer type is, that it pays off, in particular for agents with low wealth to keep a relatively high money reserve in order to have a buffer to offset temporal wealth shocks.  Since the given utility function is strictly concave, low level wealth agents are overproportionally hit by low wealth levels so - as the money reserve fraction is the same for all agents - the social planner chooses a relativeley high level of money reserve such that "low wealth level" agents don't have a too strong effect on the social planners objective function (average (expected) final utility).

From a technical perspective, it would be interesting to write an object/class function which creates a 3D heatplot over the whole range of the money reserve ([0,1]) for both agent types. This would allow to determine approximate (local) equilibria graphically. Alternatively, the golden ratio search approach for (local) optima could be implemented for two dimensional functions.

##Exercise 3

As remarked in Exercise 2, the "optimal" strategy (i.e. choosing a particular money reserve) to reach the highest average (expected) utility for GeneralConsumers in the team setting depends on the strategies chosen by the other teams. Moreover, each change of a team's own strategy changes the optimal utilities of the other teams since the economic equilibrium is determined by all team's strategies. This gives rise to heterogenity in the money reserve, or equivalently, saving decision of each team's GeneralConsumer type. In such a setting, the saving decision of each team is obviously exogenous and could be interpreted in terms of risk aversion when taking into account not only expectational functionals but also higher order functionals such as volatility (i.e. mean-variance framework). 

We also remark that an interesting approach to "win" the ranking in such a framework would be to write an Object/Class which instantenously optimizes the saving fraction given the savings decision of the other teams. 
